is it now the case that premiership
footballers
care more about children going hungry
than most mps
so this is of course as a reference to
marcus rashford and his campaign to get
free school meals
throughout the holidays and labour
supported the island throughout the
holidays until easter
i mean anne i also i'm going to come to
you first as children's commissioner for
england
um well certainly uh marcus rashford uh
young guy 22 really talented individual
and footballer
has rocketed this issue uh center stage
it's something that people have
campaigned for for a long time but he
brings that personal
experience and you know what he's able
to do is say look for
these kids life is limited in every way
you know i can't forget the first time i
went into a secondary school and saw
food banks
and saw washing machines actually there
to wash the kids clothes
that's the reality for a growing number
of children
and one which you know may
the accusation last night was that it
was sticking plaster it may not be the
full answer
but actually we need a long-term plan
until we have it
the bottom line surely has to be that
children get the help they need
to not go hungry and i remain
absolutely astonished that we're still
having this debate uh it's 2020. you
know a wealthy country it has the air of
dickensian about it
um and i actually think that people do
want to do the best for kids
and we've done that government's been
bold and generous
in providing preschool meals over recent
months
and to continue that while we're in the
midst of the crisis and pandemic to me
sounds a basic so what do you make of of
comments for example for one tour emp
during the debate uh where is the slick
pr campaign encouraging absent parents
to take some responsibility for their
children
i don't believe in nationalizing
children well there's always debate you
kind of have children you should look
after them kind of bit like pets
um but again i thought we'd kind of move
beyond that um
of course families want to look after
their kids of course they want to
provide for them but we know that
reality is that
kids often do not have food in the
cupboards i had a a group of news around
kids come to see me
really bright individuals um but they
told me they would go home
and not know what was in the cupboards
and for a lot of us that's difficult to
imagine what that means
but it takes away all your confidence
all your self-belief and all your
ability actually that the future is
going to have
any promise for you so i think you know
we are in the middle of the pandemic
still
we are at crisis point there's a growing
number of children who
are in poverty that's not going away it
needs a serious plan
um and i want government and i would say
this whatever government was there
actually to see it as their mission that
they reduce poverty
and food poverty it is something that
governments can do
um we've seen pension of poverty reduced
drastically over recent years
but really the focus has to be because
if we're gonna level up
and you know if anyone's gonna you know
in the northeast we
everyone wants the northeast to succeed
but actually
people have to be able to know where
that they're gonna be able to
uh be financially viable to do that and
kids need to know
that they're gonna be able to succeed
and thrive
martin you're a teacher of course what's
your perspective
i am so one of the basic rights of a
child
according to the un is to the right to
nutritious food and i think the comments
in parliament for example it's
it's really important to remember
poverty is not a choice it's not a
lifestyle choice
and children have the right to
nutritious food
and i think really we need to sort of
the government need to sort of
understand that and
actually if they can fund eat out to
help out then surely they can
fund something that would prevent
children from going hungry
david jasper thanks for joining um i
just
find it hypocritical that they voted
against extending their free school
meals
and and yet they voted themselves a 3
000 pound plus pay rise
well they didn't vote it for themselves
i mean this is an independent committee
that
i've got that right nick you haven't
done that's right and bridget that does
that but i i hear your point
stephen what do what did you make of the
debate and
and marcus rashford's campaign i think
first of all i think
marcus rush what an inspiring young man
and i have to say
it is really impressive to see and we
were used to
other kinds of headlines about
footballers and but to see
this young man be such a role model and
and really inspiring
in his courage and bravery to stand up
for something he really believes in
um and uh and i think that the
do you think the government was right to
to to oppose we had a brief discussion
it came up in the previous question it
was about trust and it was about the the
social cohesion and trust in the
government and we've seen countries
around the world that have done well
with coronavirus and the
cover 19 response that have both trusted
in the people and have the trust of the
people
and if you look at jacinda arden's
election win in new zealand it's been
described as an example of compassionate
competence
this is a different kind of democracy i
still don't know whether you think the
government should have
i think it's an absolute own goal i
think it's it's just i don't understand
how it is that even if they don't
believe with the detail of this they
could at this time vote against
money for children and i think one of
the things we're seeing with the covet
is it is exacerbating and making worse
social
divides that we already have in this
country we have a huge problem
with uh inequality although energy is a
foundation
one of our investment themes is early
years education and there is such a
dramatic
problem with the the fact that in the
21st century children that grow up in
britain
their economic uh success in life is
already
mostly predictable at the age of five
and and
and we just need dramatically more
investment in children
in education and free school meals for
children on school holidays
it's just so obviously an ex opportunity
for the government to show
some compassion bridget i mean it's just
inexplicable that
in the middle of this terrible pandemic
as we come into a really difficult
winter for lots of families that the
government won't
support this i think marcus rashford has
done an incredible job
as someone who was himself once poor and
hungry speaking up for vulnerable
children who don't have a voice
and to make sure that no child goes
hungry this christmas
i mean we are such a wealthy country
with great opportunity
and it is a scar on our country that so
many children
grow up in poverty avoidable poverty the
government could step
in not just in this area but i think you
know as ann was just saying that
you know this is one aspect of what
we've seen as a growing trend in recent
years
where more and more children including
those in families where there is work
are finding that money just isn't there
and it doesn't stretch
and that's putting families in an
impossible position now
you know i i when i grew up as someone
who spent part of my childhood on free
school meals
in a single parent family i was lucky
lots of the other kids i grew up with
weren't so lucky and they weren't so
fortunate
i thought with a country we could put
those days behind us by going backwards
and it just it breaks my heart to see
kids in my community
just going hungry in this in the midst
of this terrible terrible crisis
joseph well i find this debate
uh actually amazing i i do find what the
government did
unconscionable you know in new york city
when we closed the schools
uh in the lockdown
one thing we kept was the school lunch
programs
people could go to the schools and get
the lunches that they would have
otherwise gotten
you know a lot of careful uh social
distancing and all that
but the fact that a child who doesn't
get food
can't be scarred for life and obviously
can't learn uh in the way that they
should
so uh as everybody's been saying
it's a basic human right the unit is the
child your child is a person
uh you're talking about the future of
the uk
and uh the fact that uh
we're not you're not in the dickinsonian
uh era you're
you're in the 21st century that
you would be having this debate about
whether children
should have adequate nutrition i find
quite unbelievable nikki you supported
legislation that would give the poorest
children free school meals over the
holidays back in 2017.
is this a good look for the government
well
i i think the labour party might have
found they've got more supporters
yesterday
if the deputy labor leader hadn't called
one of the conservative mps scum
in in the course of the debate i mean i
have to say yesterday's debate
i'm not sure that anyone's defending
that's not that's not exactly the point
is it
the point is if you want to build a a
coalition
we've heard comments saying it's
unconscionable that the government
didn't support this well
if the labour party had really wanted
and i think that marcus rashford
unfortunately he complained about it
becoming politicized if
a party really wanted support they
wouldn't have made it what's called an
opposition day debate
there will be other ways to build a
coalition in parliament
and i should just challenge the fact
that obviously his education uh
so what was it was it a political reason
then that
the government didn't support it or did
the government support it because it
doesn't believe in it
the government has put in money
dramatically to expand
free school meals anyway
the government didn't support it yes is
it because they didn't like the way
labor labor put the motion or because
the government doesn't believe on
in it on prince the government has spent
over 300 million pounds this year and
making sure that school
meal vouchers can be redeemed and
actually to answer
jose's point that obviously when schools
were not open in the spring and summer
of
of this year that is exactly when the
government did put those hundreds of
millions of pounds
in to make sure that meals were
available
to those children who would otherwise be
on free school meals
um i personally think there are other
ways and made a good point about needing
overall strategy quite right we can't do
that in the middle of a pandemic
but actually making sure we work with
local authorities for example
who are those the clues free school
meals so we we give support to children
at school uh and you know pre-breakfast
clubs and after school clubs and
everything else
but at other times when when the schools
have been open
there are other ways in which to get
money and the government is putting
money into local authorities we could
i'm sure
we could do more to put money via local
authorities to support families in need
but yesterday's handling of the debate i
say watching that toxic
debate in parliament and watching the
way that it was it was handled
bridgette knows if you want an issue
really tackled don't put it down as an
opposition day motion if you want to
build a coalition
in parliament so kids go hungry this
christmas because you don't like the
parliamentary process
if you want if you really labor party
want to achieve you if you really want
to get people
uh supporting this debate then as i say
you know labeling
uh conservative mps unconscionable on
parliamentary
uh words uh and then the way that it was
dealt absolutely not the government is
putting that money in the better thing
would be to work together
to make sure that actually local
authorities and schools
are able to get that money and help to
support those children
who are uh obviously otherwise not
getting supported
i need to get some more but very briefly
what do you make of that so i think
the whole uh issue of feeding children
which is
absolutely fundamental um has got caught
up in the political headline here
and it's something which failed
yesterday i think
because it ended up as a secondary issue
here
it is too important for that and i do
think people have to work together to
put this aside
there has been a lot put in over recent
months which means it's even
stranger to not put that extra 40
million in over the next few
weeks that's what wells is doing that's
what scotland's doing
and at the end of the day yes of course
all those long-term plans need to be
there
all of the different ways of supporting
children really important
that free school meals be there in
school or not it does what it says on
the tin it gets straight to kids
you know they've got a meal and actually
that's what gives
kids and parents confidence too
you